Okay, ladies and gentlemen, last speaker this morning, Debra, you know what, I have to stop
drinking decaf.
I'm going to hand you the microphone.
No problem.
Okay, I am so excited today to talk to you about teacups, giraffes, and R Markdown.
My name is Desiree De Leon, and today I'm going to be talking to you about a project
that I worked on with my co-author, Hassa Wallam, last year to make teaching and learning
statistics a little bit more inviting, fun, and intuitive, and this was all done using
only an R Markdown website.
So my goal here today for the next 15 minutes is to kind of give you a quick tour around
this project and hopefully give you some ideas for what's possible with HTML output of R
Markdown so that you can incorporate some of these things into your own materials in
the future.
Okay, so let's start with the problem.
When teaching something that has the potential to be a little bit dry, what is it that makes
it difficult to motivate learners?
Within our own local academic circles, Hassa and I had gotten the impression that many
people saw statistics as either something unintuitive, scary, or very boring, and we
wanted to see if we could do something about that.
So we thought, let's teach a really cool stats seminar at our university, and we were pretty
excited about this idea, but for reasons of red tape, our idea for teaching got squashed,
but we decided that we still wanted to make that content and put it online.
But then that introduces a second problem, which is that we now lose that precious face-to-face
time with students in a classroom that usually adds an additional hurdle for engagement,
unless we could come up with a way to keep that content compelling.
And so we thought that we could try this by nesting our statistics lessons inside of a
story, and we all know that for a good story, you need good characters.
So really early on in our process, we started to brainstorm some heroes that could play
the protagonists throughout our statistical content that we were going to be building.
And ultimately, we came up with the teacup giraffe, which is our fictional little species
named for its tiny stature.
And so now we had this hero for all of our stats modules, and we could begin to make
up data about it and build a story around it, and so I just want to give you a small
sampler of what this narrative is like.
So there are two distinct populations of teacup giraffes, each inhabiting their own
remote islands.
And as the learner coming to our site, you play the role of the graduate student, and
you've been tasked with collecting data about this mysterious little species, which the
most sought-after data is about their height, which on both islands is variable.
Teacup giraffes also really love eating celery.
So by assessing how much of it that they eat, you now have an additional variable to measure.
And all the while that you're collecting this data, you deal with really demanding emails
from your advisor back at home, who needs GG plots and other results for these data,
and he needs them now.
But hopefully, teacup giraffes make that a little bit less stressful.
So with this, now you've gotten a little bit of a sampler of the teacup giraffe's world,
and this is actually what served as our backdrop for our equations, our code, and all of our
exercises that we built.
And actually, we went a little bit overboard in creating this world, because we wrote an
entire backstory that was completely separate from the stats content, and it's all about
how the giraffes were discovered, a little bit about their silly behavior.
And at this point, you're probably thinking it's reaching the level of absurdity, and
I actually agree with you.
But we hope that all of this storyboarding would really help to suck learners in, and
not only learners, because as content creators, we also got sucked into the teacup giraffe
world, quite literally.
Okay, but silliness aside, if you do have some creative muscle that you'd like to flex,
then creating your own good characters is a great way to do that with your educational
content.
All of the character elements that I've shown you so far here are illustrations that I made
on an iPad Pro using the Procreate app, but in case drawing your own characters is not
a possibility, there are many other resources where you can find really great high-res and
open-source images, and one of those is unsplash.com, so I point you there for really strong visuals.
Okay, so usually at this point of introducing the project to someone, most people think
that we've actually made a children's book and not a stats website.
But our teacup giraffes do have some more utility than just ramping up the delight meter.
We specifically created our character with our lessons in mind, so in particular, we
could make things like statistical concepts, like the variance, a little bit less abstract,
because not only do our teacup giraffes provide strong visuals for word problems, like, for
example, asking what percentage of giraffes in our population will be shorter than this
little guy here, but maybe a more subtle benefit is that we can use our character to link to
otherwise less intuitive concepts.
For example, by using the spots, the color of the spots on our characters to show and
illustrate the concept of the sum of squares and how you build that, which is a precursor
for calculating the variance.
So with good characters, we now had one pillar in place to help make our content feel a little
bit more friendly.
And the next step was to include good play.
And by that I mean taking full advantage of the HTML output that you get with our markdown
by inserting movement and interaction so that the learner actually has something that they
can do on your site.
And I just want to share five examples of packages and tools that we found most useful
for this.
The first one is Plotly.
So Plotly lets you create clickable and interactive plots so that a learner can see a concept
play out in real time.
This, for example, is a Plotly plot that we used to explain why the equation for sample
variance needs to be divided by n minus 1, and we, of course, explained this in the text
before showing this plot.
And another good thing that you can use for good play is the Gifsky package, which lets
you make GIFs.
And so once you've installed Gifsky, you can include an animation hook in the code chunk
settings, and this will stitch together any plots that are output from that code chunk.
So this GIF here was made by throwing several ggplots in one code chunk and then looping
through all of them with something like either a per function or an apply function.
But you can actually use the Gifsky hook to make GIFs out of regular images as well, so
you're not just limited to ggplots.
This is a GIF that we made to represent very abstractly the process of going from cross
products to covariances and then standardizing those to become correlation scores.
But the most important part of good play that we wanted to give our learners was the ability
to go through some stats methods by hand, or in other words, we wanted learners to have
a chance to break apart functions, write their own functions, at least ones to kind of eliminate
that statistical black box feeling, and in order to do that, we needed interactive console
windows in our site.
So our solution was to take a LearnR window and embed it into our R Markdown website.
Here's an example of how this works.
So if you have not seen the LearnR package before, LearnR documents are R Markdown documents
that can be used as interactive tutorials, and they usually exist as standalone things
or standalone apps, but what's really cool about them is that they have these built-in
little consoles, so you can preload code into them for a learner or text.
You can also preload solutions, which a user can then run and see their output, and that's
great.
So one of the problems, however, is that when a user is using a LearnR document in the iframe,
it's a little tricky to get it to resize appropriately when the user is interacting with it, and
so a solution to get it to resize appropriately is to use a little bit of JavaScript, and
in particular something called an iframe resizer, which does exactly what it sounds like.
So to our knowledge, this is the first time that someone's applied an iframe resizer to
a LearnR window that's inside of an iframe, and the process for it is a little bit involved,
so I'm not going to cover the details here, but I have created a step-by-step guide that
shows you how to do this in your own R Markdown documents, and you can find that on my blog,
which is at deseret.rbind.io.
And LearnR windows are not the only things that you can embed, of course.
There are two more quick pieces of good play that I'd like to share with you that are considerably
easier to embed in your site.
So first there's a regular shiny app like this one, which we used to have learners guess
correlation values, and using the same iframe approach, you can also embed quiz questions,
and we haven't yet done this in our project, but we look forward to asking really tough
quiz questions like this one.
Okay.
So by using Plotly, Gifski, LearnR, and Shiny, we could make our R Markdown site so much
more interactive, and there's still one more piece missing that I'd like to share, though,
about our site, and that is good design.
And so by this I mean the page layout and styling that's distinct from the content,
but brings good vibes and a sense of polish to your product.
So essentially judging a book by its cover or by extension, judging a site by its HTML
and CSS.
And while this is, of course, not the best way to measure the quality of your content,
the degree of styling that you give your site not only changes a learner's first impression
when they first see your page, but it can also improve readability, navigation, and
the user's general experience as they go through your content.
So out of the box, here is what our R Markdown site might have looked like just using the
default settings for an R Markdown website.
And this is a decent start, but I want to share three things that I think deliver some
pretty big impact.
And the first is decluttering.
So we do this by getting rid of borders and highlights and numbers that are not absolutely
essential to our output.
And then we can add a whole lot more white space so things don't feel so cramped.
So around the table of contents, between paragraphs and headers.
We can also constrain the width of the body of the text.
And finally, we can increase font size and the line height of the paragraph, too.
And so once we've made these changes, we get a lot more breathing room on the page
and it's easier to read.
Most of these changes do involve a little bit of CSS, but if that scares you, one non-CSS
thing that you can do in your R Markdown document, straight in the document itself, is just by
adding backslashes or line breaks on their own lines.
And adding that space in between is manually something that goes a long way when it comes
to making more breathing room.
And so here's kind of the before and after just with these, like, right off the bat changes
of more white space and breathing room.
The second thing I want to share about good design is setting the visual ambiance for
the site by adding a big image to the top, which in the lingo is called a hero image.
And so you can do this if you're familiar with the R Markdown setting for the includes
before body option, and you can just insert a file in there that references some big
image to go at the very top of your page.
And finally, making use of built-in features of Pandoc, which is what runs under the hood
of R Markdown, to make things like note boxes.
So these can help organize your page content and help call out things like instructions
or notes or critical thinking questions for your learners.
Here we've used them to encase the learning objectives for this particular module.
And the step-by-step process for making these note boxes is also something that you can
find on my blog.
So there's some other things that you can tweak as well.
Things like adding a logo, Google fonts, you can customize your nav bar.
And these and many other good design elements I've shown you today are things that, again,
involve some CSS.
If your experience with CSS in the past has been either difficult or nonexistent, I hope
that this does not stop you.
So this past summer I interned at RStudio with Allison Hill, and we started to create
some R Markdown templates so that you can create these very same layouts in an out-of-the-box
way.
These two are still works in progress, but the resources called RStudio for EDU and RMD
for EDU will be coming to a GitHub repository near you, so you can keep a lookout for those
later this year.
So now I've shown you some examples of good characters, good play, and good design.
And I think it's worth mentioning that all of these things are things that Hass and I
did without ever needing to leave the comfort of our favorite IDE.
And with that, I can now show you what it looks like when you put all of these things
together.
If you'd like to check out the wonderful world of teacups, giraffes, and statistics, you
can do that at bit.ly.
For the best experience, I recommend doing that on desktop and in the Chrome browser.
But the source code for all of this project is something that you can also get to by clicking
on the GitHub logo and the nav bar of the site, and that will take you straight to the
GitHub for it.
We're still in development for this project, and we're just starting to test this out with
real live learners, but we welcome GitHub issues and blog comments or come find us at
some point.
We'd love to get your feedback and hear your questions about it.
I hope this has given you some ideas for what's possible to make when you're teaching with
our markdown, and we hope that you can incorporate some good characters, good play, and good
design in your next project.
And so with that, I'd like to thank my co-author, Hass Olam, for being the other half of this
project, Allison Hill for helping me package up so many of these designs and layouts in
a way that I'll be able to share with all of you soon, and also Carl and the rest of
the education team for their support of the giraffe project.
And if you want to hear or if you want to find out more about me or see what I'm posting
on Twitter, you can do that at these different handles, and thank you guys so much for your
attention.
So first, that's the first time I've ever had somebody come in exactly on time to the
second, so well done.
First question, for people with no design background, do you have any recommended resources
or starting points?
Yeah, certainly.
So the things that I've been developing with Allison Hill I think will be a great start
for that, so that our studio for EDU, I mean, again, those things are still in development,
but I think it's important to note, so when Hass and I started this project, neither of
us had any knowledge of CSS.
It mostly started off as, oh, we saw this really cool thing online, let's start Googling,
is this possible to do with our markdown, and we didn't know the right search terms
or anything like that.
So I think if you have enough grit and perseverance, you can get anything that you see out there
on the internet to work with our markdown, but the things I'm working on with Allison
will hopefully make that process easier.
Okay, and the second one is, how are you going to tell whether this is actually helping people
with the stats?
Yeah, that's a great question, so that comes as soon as we start getting feedback from
real learners.
So we have Google Analytics up, which are helpful to some degree, but I think we need
to pilot this out in real classrooms to see what the in-person learner thinks about it,
and then from there we can think more creatively about how to get feedback from online learners.
Third question is, have you been thinking about taking this to the general public, the
sort of audience that our previous speaker was talking about?
Yeah, so I mean, I guess the idea is that we want to reach as many people as possible.
That was part of the reason why we wanted to make this content feel as friendly and
fun as we hope that it does.
I mean, if we can make something appealing to people who have never even previously thought
they'd be interested in stats, then we think that we can reach a lot of different communities
and groups of people.
So, next step.
Okay, and last question before we break for lunch.
You said that a lot of people looked at this and thought that you were actually writing
a children's book instead.
Have you thought about writing a children's book?
I would love to write a children's book.
Well, I've helped with a children's book, one that is co-authored by Greg Wilson.
I guess, should we announce?
I don't know if you want me to announce it.
You should turn this into a children's book.
Oh, okay.
Round of applause if you want this turned into a children's book.
Okay, so there's your second.
And again, please, one round of applause for all four of our speakers.